# Cosmological Constraints on Neutrino Injection

Toru Kanzaki, Masahiro Kawasaki

Institute for Cosmic Ray Research, University of Tokyo, Kashiwa 277-8582, JAPAN

Kazunori Kohri

Physics Department, Lancaster University, Lancaster LA1 4YB, UK

Takeo Moroi

Department of Physics, Tohoku University, Sendai 980-8578, JAPAN

###### Abstract

We derive general constraints on the relic abundances of a long-lived particle which mainly decays into a neutrino (and something else) at cosmological time scales. Such an exotic particle may show up in various particle-physics models based on physics beyond the standard model. The constraints are obtained from big-bang nucleosynthesis, cosmic microwave background and diffuse neutrino and photon fluxes, depending on the lifetime and the electromagnetic and hadronic branching ratios.

TU-791

## 1 Introduction

In modern cosmology, success of the big-bang nucleosynthesis (BBN) and existence of the cosmic microwave background (CMB) are important facts that support the standard big-bang model. Prediction of the standard BBN scenario is in a reasonable agreement with the observations and the COBE observations [1] showed the perfect blackbody of CMB spectrum. On the other hand, in particle physics, if we consider physics beyond the standard model, there exist various new particles some of which have long lifetimes and decay during or after BBN. Examples of such long-lived particles include gravitino and moduli predicted in the framework of supersymmetry (SUSY) and string theories.

BBN and CMB are useful probes to exotic particles predicted in physics beyond standard model. In fact, the prediction of BBN changes significantly if there exists an exotic massive particle with long lifetime. (Hereafter, we call such a particle \(X\).) When the lifetime of \(X\) is longer than about 1 sec, the decay of \(X\) may induce electromagnetic and hadronic showers, which lead to photo- and hadro-dissociation of \({{}^{4}He}\) and subsequent non-thermal production of other light elements (\({\rm D}\), \({{}^{3}He}\), \({{}^{6}Li}\), and \({{}^{7}Li}\)). Such processes may significantly change the prediction of the standard BBN scenario and, consequently, resultant abundances of light elements may conflict with observations. Furthermore, the electromagnetic energy injection causes distortion of the CMB spectrum. Since the observation [1] shows that this distortion is quite small, we can constrain the abundance of \(X\). Finally, if the lifetime is very long, the spectrum of neutrinos and photons produced by the decay of \(X\) are not thermalized and may be directly observed.

The effects of the long-lived particles on BBN were well studied for radiative decay [2, 3, 4, 5] and for hadronic decay [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12] and stringent constraints on the abundance and lifetime of \(X\) were obtained. However, when \(X\) mainly decays into neutrinos, it is expected that the constraints become much weaker because of weakness of interactions between neutrinos and other standard model particles. The specific case where a sneutrino mainly decays into a gravitino and a neutrino has been already discussed in [14, 15, 16]. Such a scenario is realized when the sneutrino is the next lightest superparticle (NLSP) while the gravitino is the lightest superparticle (LSP).¹ In such a case, interaction of \(X\) (i.e., sneutrino) is well-known, and it is found that BBN provides the most stringent constraint.

[FOOTNOTE:1][ENDFOOTNOTE]

However, there are other possibilities of having long-lived massive particles which dominantly decay into neutrinos. For example, if the LSP is axino (\(\tilde{a}\)) and the NLSP is sneutrino, dominant decay process of the sneutrino (\(=X\)) is \(\tilde{\nu}\to\nu+\tilde{a}\). Decay rate of this process depends on the properties of axion supermultiplet. Thus, in general, properties of \(X\) (i.e., lifetime, hadronic branching ratio, and so on) is model-dependent. Consequently, the most stringent bound may not be from BBN. For example, high energy neutrinos emitted in the \(X\) particle decay was considered in [13] where the upper bounds on the \(X\) abundance were obtained from nucleon-decay detectors and Fly’s Eye air shower array.

In this paper, we derive general cosmological constraints on scenarios in which there exists a long-lived massive particle which dominantly decays into a neutrino (and something else). We treat the lifetime and hadronic branching ratio of the long-lived particle as free parameters. In this case, in fact, the constraint from the main decay mode is quite weak, and other subdominant decay channel which contain electronic and hadronic particles may be important [16]. In our analysis, we take into account both of these decay channels and discuss various cosmological constraints.

Organization of this paper is as followis. In Section 2, we discuss BBN constraints. In Section 3, constraints from CMB is considered. Then in Section 4, we study constraints from diffuse neutrino and photon. Section 5 is devoted for conclusion.

## 2 BBN Constraints

Before going into the main subject of this section, which is the constraints from the BBN, let us first summarize the properties of the long-lived heavy particle \(X\) which mainly decays into a neutrino (and some other weakly interacting particle). In our study, we assume that \(X\) mainly decays as

\[X\rightarrow\nu+Y,\] (1)

where \(Y\) is an invisible particle which is very weakly interacting so that it does not cause any subsequent scattering with background particles. One of the well-motivated examples is the case where the sneutrino is the NLSP while gravitino (or axino) is the LSP. (Then, \(X\) is the sneutrino and \(Y\) is the gravitino or axino.) In addition, for concreteness, we assume that the final-state neutrino is electron neutrino. (We note here that we have checked that the constraints on the properties of \(X\) are not sensitive to the flavor of the final-state neutrino.)

Even though the dominant decay mode is the two-body process, one should keep in mind that decay chennels with three- and/or four-body final state should also exist since the neutrino as well as \(X\) and/or \(Y\) couple to \(Z\)- and \(W\)-bosons. The emitted (real or virtual) weak bosons subsequently decay into quarks and leptons. With this type of three- and/or four-body decay processes, energetic quarks and charged leptons are produced.

If the decays of \(X\) occur during or after BBN, the standard-model particles emitted in the decay can affect the abundances of primordial light elements. First the high energy neutrinos emitted in the main decay mode (two-body decay) scatter off the background leptons and produce charged leptons (\(e^{\pm}\), \(\mu^{\pm}\)) and charged pions. The former induce electromagnetic showers which destroy light elements, and the latter change the \(n\)-\(p\) ratio through nucleon and pion interactions. Second \(X\) decays into electromagnetic and hadronic particles via the three- and/or four-body decay modes with small branching ratio \(B_{X}\). Such processes directly induce electromagnetic and hadronic showers and change the abundances of light elements [10].

### Two-body Decay

First, we discuss effects of the dominant decay process \(X\to Y+\nu_{e}\). We presume that \(Y\) produced in the decay is a very weakly interacting particle, and that it is irrelevant for BBN. Neutrino, however, may affect abundances of light elements. The emitted energetic neutrinos scatter off background leptons via weak interaction and several kinds of particles may be pair-produced.

First, charged leptons may be produced via the following processes:²

[FOOTNOTE:2][ENDFOOTNOTE]

\[\nu_{i}+\bar{\nu}_{i,{\rm BG}} \to e^{-}+e^{+}\] (2)
\[\nu_{i}+\bar{\nu}_{i,{\rm BG}} \to \mu^{-}+\mu^{+}\] (3)
\[\nu_{\mu}+\bar{\nu}_{e,{\rm BG}} \to \mu^{-}+e^{+}\] (4)
\[\nu_{e}+\bar{\nu}_{\mu,{\rm BG}} \to e^{-}+\mu^{+}\] (5)

where \(i=e,\mu,\tau\) is flavor index, and the subscript “BG” is for background particles. The muons emitted in the above processes quickly decay into electrons and neutrinos. Thus, the above processes produce energetic electrons and positrons which cause electromagnetic cascade. Energetic photons in the cascade induce photo-dissociation processes of light elements. Effects of these processes have been already studied in [14].

Another possible effect is due to the production of pion pairs. High energy neutrinos scatter off the background neutrinos and electrons (positrons) and produce pions as

\[\nu_{i}+\bar{\nu}_{i,{\rm BG}} \to \pi^{-}+\pi^{+},\] (6)
\[\nu_{i}+{e}^{\pm}_{i,{\rm BG}} \to \pi^{0}+\pi^{\pm}.\] (7)

The nucleus-pion interaction rate is \(\sim 10^{8}{\rm sec}^{-1}\times(T/{\rm MeV})^{3}\) which is larger than the decay rate of the charged pion \((\sim 4\times 10^{7}{\rm sec}^{-1})\) for \(T\sim 1{\rm MeV}\). Therefore, the charged pions produced at \(T\sim 1{\rm MeV}\) scatter off the background nuclei and change protons (neutrons) into neutrons (protons) via

\[\pi^{-}+p \to n+\pi^{0},~{}n+\gamma,\] (8)
\[\pi^{+}+n \to p+\pi^{0},~{}p+\gamma.\] (9)

Consequently, \(n/p\) ratio is increased, resulting in more \({}^{4}{\rm He}\). Notice that, because of very short lifetime, the neutral pions decay before they scatter off the background nuclei and hence they are harmless.

In order to estimate effects of the high-energy-neutrino induced processes, we have numerically solved the Boltzmann equation describing the time evolution of the high energy neutrino spectrum taking into account of all the processes above. Details of our calculation are given in A.

### Three and Four-body Decay

Even though the branching ratio for three and four-body decay processes are much smaller than 1, such decay processes are very important since colored and charged particles are directly emitted from these decay processes. Energetic colored and charged particles may significantly change the prediction of the standard BBN scenario. Effects of these particles are classified into three categories: photo-dissociations, hadro-dissociations and \(p\leftrightarrow n\) conversion.

In order to study the effects of three- and four-body decay processes, it is important to obtain the spectra of quarks and leptons emitted by the decay of \(X\), which depends on the model. In our analysis, we use, up to normalization, those obtained in the case where \(X\) is the sneutrino and \(Y\) is the gravitino; in such a case, the sneutrino may decay into the gravitino, neutrino (or charged lepton), and \(Z^{(*)}\) (or \(W^{(*)}\)), and the produced (real or virtual) weak bosons subsequently decay into quark- or lepton-pair. (Here, \(Z^{*}\) and \(W^{*}\) denote virtual weak bosons.) In order to perform our analysis as model-independent as possible, we treat that the branching ratio for three- and four-body processes is a free parameter: we define branching ratio \(B_{X}\) as

\[B_{X}\equiv\frac{\Gamma(X\to{\rm 3~{}body})+\Gamma(X\to{\rm 4~{} body})}{\Gamma(X\to{\rm all})},\] (10)

where \(\Gamma\) is decay width. For the study of the effects of photo-dissociation processes and CMB spectral distortion, we also calculate averaged “visible energy” emitted from one \(X\):

\[E_{\rm vis}=B_{X}\langle E_{\rm vis}\rangle,\] (11)

where \(\langle E_{\rm vis}\rangle\) are averaged energy carried away by charged particles and photons in three and four-decay modes. The energy distributions of photons, neutrinos, leptons and nucleons produced by the decay of \(X\) are calculated by means of Monte Carlo simulations with the PYTHIA package [17]. In Figs. 1-4, we plot the spectra of photons and leptons (\(e^{+}+e^{-}\)), respectively. From these distributions we calculate the averaged energy and obtain \(\langle E_{\rm vis}\rangle=25.3,146,821\) and \(5630\ {\rm GeV}\) for \(m_{X}=10^{2},10^{3},10^{4}\) and \(10^{5}\ {\rm GeV}\), respectively. Here, \(m_{X}\) is the mass of \(X\). \(E_{\rm vis}\) is much smaller than \(m_{X}\) since we are interested in the case where \(B_{X}\ll 1\).

[FIGURE:S2.F1][ENDFIGURE]

[FIGURE:S2.F2][ENDFIGURE]

[FIGURE:S2.F3][ENDFIGURE]

[FIGURE:S2.F4][ENDFIGURE]

Photo-dissociation processes are induced by energetic photons in electromagnetic shower which is caused by charged particles and/or photons emitted from \(X\). With given background temperature, the distribution function of energetic photons depends on total amount of energy injected by particles with electromagnetic interaction, and is insensitive to the shape of energy spectrum of primary particles. Thus, once \(E_{\rm vis}\) is obtained, the energy distribution of energetic photons in the electromagnetic shower can be obtained. Then, photo-dissociation rates are obtained by convoluting energy distribution function and cross sections of photo-dissociation reactions. For details of our treatment of photo-dissociation processes, see [3].

For the study of hadro-dissociation processes, it is necessary to obtain energy distributions of (primary) hadrons which are produced after the hadronization of quarks emitted from \(X\). We have calculated the spectra of \(p\) and \(n\) by using PYTHIA. These hadrons cause hadronic shower and induced hadro-dissociation processes. In our analysis, in addition, we have also calculated the number of charged pions produced by the decay of \(X\). Such charged pions, protons and neutrons become the source of \(p\leftrightarrow n\) conversion process, which changes the number of \({}^{4}{\rm He}\) [7, 9].³ Once the spectra of hadrons are obtained, effects of hadro-dissociation and \(p\leftrightarrow n\) conversion are studied with the procedure given in [10].

[FOOTNOTE:3][ENDFOOTNOTE]

### Numerical Results

In our analysis, we have followed the evolutions of the number densities of the light elements. For this purpose, we have modified the Kawano code [18] including photo- and hadro-dissociation processes. As observational constraints on the primordial abundances of light elements, we adopt those used in [16] except for \(Y_{\rm p}\) and \((n_{{}^{3}He}/n_{\rm D})_{\rm p}\):

\[(n_{\rm D}/n_{\rm H})_{\rm p} = (2.82\pm 0.26)\times 10^{-5},\] (12)
\[(n_{{}^{3}He}/n_{\rm D})_{\rm p} < 0.83+0.27,\] (13)
\[Y_{\rm p} = 0.2516\pm 0.0040,\] (14)
\[\log_{10}(n_{{}^{7}Li}/n_{\rm H})_{\rm p} = -9.63\pm 0.06\pm 0.3.\] (15)
\[(n_{{}^{6}Li}/n_{{}^{7}Li})_{\rm p} < 0.046\pm 0.022+0.084,\] (16)

where the subscript “p” is for primordial value (just after BBN), and \(Y_{\rm p}\) is the primordial mass fraction of \({{}^{4}He}\). For the center value of \(Y_{\rm p}\), we have adopted the value reported in [19] in which the authors used new data of HeI emissivities,⁴ and conservatively added a larger error (= \(0.0040\)) as discussed in [21]. For \((n_{{}^{3}He}/n_{\rm D})_{\rm p}\), we have adopted most newly-reported values of D and \({}^{3}\)He abundances observed in protosolar clouds [22], \((n_{{}^{3}He}/n_{\rm H})_{\rm PSC}=(1.66\pm 0.06)\times 10^{-5}\) and \((n_{\rm D}/n_{\rm H})_{\rm PSC}=(2.00\pm 0.35)\times 10^{-5}\), where the subscript “PSC” means a value in the protosolar cloud. (For the importance of the upper bounds on \((n_{{}^{3}He}/n_{\rm D})_{\rm p}\), see [23, 10].)

[FOOTNOTE:4][ENDFOOTNOTE]

We parameterize the primordial abundance of \(X\) by yield variable \(Y_{X}\) which is defined as the ratio of number density and total entropy density at (\(t\ll\tau_{X}\));

\[Y_{X}\equiv\left[\frac{n_{X}}{s}\right]_{t\ll\tau_{X}},\] (17)

where \(\tau_{X}\) is the lifetime of \(X\). If \(Y_{X}\) is too large, abundances of light elements are too much affected to be consistent with the observations. Thus, we can derive upper bound on \(Y_{X}\).

[FIGURE:S2.F5][ENDFIGURE]

[FIGURE:S2.F6][ENDFIGURE]

[FIGURE:S2.F7][ENDFIGURE]

[FIGURE:S2.F8][ENDFIGURE]

[FIGURE:S2.F9][ENDFIGURE]

[FIGURE:S2.F10][ENDFIGURE]

In Figs. 5-10, we show BBN constraints on \(\tau_{X}\) and \(m_{X}Y_{X}\) for \(B_{X}=10^{-3}\) and \(B_{X}=10^{-6}\); we found that constraints with \(B_{X}=0\) is almost same as that with \(B_{X}=10^{-6}\).

As one can see from these figures, the most important constraint comes from overproduction of \({}^{4}{\rm He}\) when \(\tau_{X}\lesssim 10^{2}{\rm sec}\). Since protons are more abundant than neutrons, a significant amount of proton may be converted to neutron through nucleus-pion interaction (and nucleon-nuclen interactions for relatively large \(B_{X}\)) and consequently \({}^{4}{\rm He}\) is overproduced. When \(10^{2}{\rm sec}\lesssim\tau_{X}\lesssim 10^{7}{\rm sec}\), the background \({}^{4}{\rm He}\) (which we call \(\alpha_{\rm BG}\)) is effectively dissociated by the energetic hadrons produced in the hadronic shower. In this case, overproduction of D may occur as a result of hadro-dissociation of \(\alpha_{\rm BG}\). In addition, energetic T and \({}^{3}{\rm He}\) are also produced and they synthesize \({}^{6}\)Li through the \({}^{6}{\rm Li}\) via \({\rm T}+\alpha_{\rm BG}\to{}^{6}{\rm Li}+n\) and \({}^{3}{\rm He}+\alpha_{\rm BG}\to{}^{6}{\rm Li}+p\). When \(\tau_{X}\gtrsim 10^{7}{\rm sec}\), the energetic hadrons are stopped by the scattering processes with background electrons, and hence the effects of hadro-dissociation become less efficient than those of the photo-dissociation. In particular, the energetic photons produced in the electromagnetic shower destroy \(\alpha_{\rm BG}\). In this case, overproduction of D and \({}^{3}{\rm He}\) occurs as a result of photo-dissociation of \(\alpha_{\rm BG}\).

The constraints on \(m_{X}Y_{X}\) depend on \(m_{X}\) in a non-trivial way. The contraint coming from the photo-dissociation caused by the two-body decay becomes stringent as \(m_{X}\) increases because neutrinos emitted in two-body decay have higher energy and scatter off the background neutrinos with larger rate. On the other hand, the rates of the hadro-dissociation and photo-disocciation caused by the three- and four-body decay depend only on \(E_{\rm vis}Y_{X}\) and hence the constraints on \(m_{X}Y_{X}\) become slightly milder as \(m_{X}\) increses. The constraint from \(n\leftrightarrow p\) conversion becomes weaker as \(m_{X}\) increases. This is because the charged pion production is roughly determined by \(Y_{X}\) for the three- and four-decay.

So far, we have shown the results for the case where the primary neutrino is electron-type. However, we have checked that the BBN constraints are almost unchanged even if \(X\) decays into muon- or tau-neutrino (and \(Y\)).

## 3 CMB Constraints

CMB also imposes constraints on the decays of \(X\). COBE observations show that CMB spectrum is almost perfect blackbody [1]. Therefore any exotic energy injections that cause distortions in the spectrum of CMB are stringently constrained [24, 25, 26]. When the photons are emitted before redshift \(z\sim 10^{7}\), they are thermalized by Compton scattering, double Compton scattering and bremsstrahlung, and no spectral distortion takes place. However, at \(z\lesssim 10^{7}\) only Compton scattering is efficient. Since the Compton scattering does not change the total number of photons, the resultant spectrum becomes a Bose-Einstein distribution with a finite chemical potential \(\mu\), regardless of the detail of the injection. For the case of massive particle decay, the number density of injected photons is negligible compared with that in the background. Therefore, the spectral distortions are determined by the fraction of the energy release, \(\Delta\rho_{\gamma}/\rho_{\gamma}\). Then, for small \(\Delta\rho_{\gamma}/\rho_{\gamma}\) the chemical potential of the photon spectrum is given by

\[\mu\simeq\frac{1}{0.714}\frac{\Delta\rho_{\gamma}}{\rho_{\gamma}}.\] (18)

As we have discussed, there are two types of processes which contribute to the electromagnetic energy injection (\(\Delta\rho_{\gamma}\)) in the present scenario. One is the two-body decay process: the high energy primary neutrinos emitted by \(X\) scatter off the background neutrinos and create charged leptons whose energy is finally converted to the energy of radiation. The other is the three- and four-body decay processes by which quarks and charged leptons are produced. In our analysis, we have taken into account both of these contributions.

### Three and four-body Decay

There are two quantities which are required to calculate the electromagnetic energy injection: branching ratio \(B_{X}\) and the averaged energy \(\langle E_{\rm vis}\rangle\).

We follow the treatment of [26] for the case of three and four-body decays. Using the fact that \(X\) decays exponentially in time with lifetime \(\tau_{X}\), we obtain

\[\frac{\Delta\rho_{\gamma}}{\rho_{\gamma}}=\frac{\langle E_{\rm vis }\rangle}{2.701T(t_{\rm eff})}\frac{n_{X}}{n_{\gamma}}B_{X},\] (19)

where \(T(t)\) is the CMB temperature and \(n_{X}\) is the number density of \(X\) before decay. Here \(t_{\rm eff}=\left[\Gamma(1+\beta)\right]^{1/\beta}\tau_{X}\) for time-temperature relation \(T\propto t^{-\beta}\), where \(\Gamma\) is the gamma function.

From Eqs. (18) and (19), we find that the chemical potential is given by

\[\mu\simeq 4.00\times 10^{2}\left(\frac{\tau_{X}}{1{\rm sec}} \right)^{1/2}\left(\frac{\langle E_{\rm vis}\rangle}{1{\rm GeV}}\right)B_{X} \frac{n_{X}}{n_{\gamma}}.\] (20)

We have assumed here that we are in the radiation dominated epoch where \(T\propto t^{-1/2}\). Note that, however, photon number changing processes (double Compton scattering and bremsstrahlung) become increasingly efficient as the photon frequency decreases. This means the spectrum becomes blackbody at low frequencies. The photons with low frequencies produced by the photon-number changing processes are transferred to higher frequencies by inverse Compton scattering and the chemical potential decreases in time. For a low \(\Omega_{b}h^{2}\) universe suggested by the BBN [29] and WMAP [30] (where, in this paper, \(\Omega_{b}\) denotes the density parameter of baryon, and \(h\) is the Hubble constant in units of \(100\ {\rm km/sec/Mpc}\)), double Compton scattering dominates the thermalization process. The chemical potential produced at \(t=t_{h}\) is blurred out at an exponential rate and the present value is given by [28]

\[\mu_{0}\equiv\mu(t_{0})=\mu(t_{h})\exp(-(t_{\rm DC}/t_{h})^{5/4})\] (21)

with

\[t_{\rm DC}=6.81\times 10^{6}\left(\frac{\Omega_{b}h^{2}}{0.0223} \right)^{4/5}\left(1-\frac{Y_{p}}{2}\right)^{4/5}{\rm sec}.\] (22)

Combining Eq. (20) with Eq. (21), we find that the chemical potential today is given by [26]

\[\mu_{0}\simeq 4.00\times 10^{2}\left(\frac{\tau_{X}}{1{\rm sec}} \right)^{1/2}\exp(-(t_{\rm DC}/\tau_{X})^{5/4})\left(\frac{\langle E_{\rm vis} \rangle}{1{\rm GeV}}\right)B_{X}\frac{n_{X}}{n_{\gamma}}.\] (23)

For late energy injection \((z\lesssim 10^{5})\), Compton scattering can no longer establish the Bose-Einstein distribution. In this case, the spectrum can be described by the Compton \(y\)-parameter which is defined by

\[y=\int dt\frac{T_{e}-T}{m_{e}}n_{e}\sigma_{T},\] (24)

where \(m_{e}\) and \(T_{e}\) are the number density and temperature of electrons and \(\sigma_{T}\) is Thomson cross section. Then the energy injection is related to \(y\) as \(\Delta\rho_{\gamma}/\rho_{\gamma}=4y\). Here, we define \(z_{K}\) as the redshift at which the time scale for energy exchange through Compton scatterings is equal to the Hubble time;

\[z_{K}\simeq 4.77\times 10^{4}\left(\frac{\Omega_{b}h^{2}}{0.0223 }\right)^{-1/2}\left(1-\frac{Y_{p}}{2}\right)^{-1/2}.\] (25)

The spectrum can be described by chemical potential \(\mu\) for energy injection at \(z>z_{K}\) and by Compton \(y\)-parameter for energy injection at \(z<z_{K}\). Here we take \(\Omega_{b}h^{2}=0.0223\) [30], \(|\mu|<9\times 10^{-5}\) and \(|y|<1.2\times 10^{-5}\) as observational limits by COBE [31, 32].

### Two-body Decay

In addition, the effect of charged-lepton productions through scattering of high energy neutrinos off background neutrinos (see Eqs. (2) – (5)) should be taken into account. The amount of energy which is converted to the background photons is estimated by

\[\frac{\Delta\rho_{\gamma}}{\rho_{\gamma}}=\int^{\infty}_{0}dt \frac{1}{\rho_{\gamma}}\frac{dE_{l}}{dt}=\frac{m_{X}}{2}\frac{n_{X}}{n_{\gamma }}\int^{\infty}_{0}dt~{}\frac{1}{2.701T}\frac{1}{\tau_{X}}r(t,m_{x},\tau_{X}),\] (26)

where \(dE_{l}/dt\) is the energy density which is converted to charged lepton and finally photon through neutrino scattering per unit time and

\[r\equiv\left(\frac{m_{X}n_{X}}{2\tau_{X}}\right)^{-1}\frac{dE_{l }}{dt}.\] (27)

Notice that \(r\) represents the ratio of the radiative energy injection per \(X\) decay to the \(X\) mass. The details of calculation are found in [14, 33]. In Figs. 11 and 12, we show the time evolution of \(r\). Fig. 11 shows that the ratio \(r\) increases with \(m_{X}\). This is because higher energy neutrino has larger cross section for scattering off the background neutrino and is also easy to exceed the threshold energy for lepton pair creations. The similar logic applies to Fig. 12. In this case, background neutrino energy increases with the decrease of \(\tau_{X}\), so that the ratio \(r\) increases.

[FIGURE:S3.F11][ENDFIGURE]

[FIGURE:S3.F12][ENDFIGURE]

### Constraint from CMB

As mentioned earlier, the spectral distortions are determined by \(\Delta\rho_{\gamma}/\rho_{\gamma}\) which is the sum of Eqs. (19) and (26). In Figs. 13 and 14, we show the upper bounds of \(m_{X}Y_{X}\) taking account of neutrino-neutrino scattering.

[FIGURE:S3.F13][ENDFIGURE]

[FIGURE:S3.F14][ENDFIGURE]

When the lifetime is short and the energy of background neutrino is sufficiently high, \(\mu\) is determined by neutrino-neutrino scattering, hence \(r\). Therefore, the constraints become severer as \(m_{X}\) becomes larger. When lifetime is long, \(\mu\) is determined by three and four-body decay of \(X\), hence \(\langle E_{\rm vis}\rangle/m_{X}\). As already mentioned, \(\langle E_{\rm vis}\rangle/m_{X}\) becomes smaller with larger \(m_{X}\). Then, the constraints become severer as \(m_{X}\) becomes smaller.

So far, we have focused only on photon energy injection. However, the emitted ultra-relativistic particles (neutrino and \(Y\)) contribute to the total relativistic energy and could lead to a more stringent constraint than that from spectral distortion, when branching ratio is sufficiently small. Before recombination, the CMB angular power spectrum is sensitive to the change of the total relativistic energy through the early integrated Sachs-Wolfe effect [34]. In addition, too much relativistic energy affects the growth of large scale structure (LSS) since the epoch for the matter-radiation equality becomes later. The increase of the total relativistic energy is conventionally described by an effective number of light neutrino species \(\Delta N_{\nu}\). The combined analysis of CMB and LSS data sets the upper bound on \(\Delta N_{\nu}\) as \(\Delta N_{\nu}\leq 5.0\) [35]. In Fig. 15, we show the constraints from the CMB spectral distortion with \(m_{X}=10^{3}~{}\mathrm{GeV}\) when \(B_{X}=10^{-3}\) and \(10^{-6}\). In addition, we also show the constraint from total relativistic energy injection, which is independent of \(B_{X}\). When branching ratio is sufficiently small, Fig. 15 shows that the constraint from the total relativistic energy injection provides severer constraint in a wide range of lifetime.

[FIGURE:S3.F15][ENDFIGURE]

## 4 Diffuse neutrino and photon Constraints

### Diffuse Neutrino Flux

When neutrino injection takes place very late, the emitted neutrinos may produce an observable peak in the diffuse neutrino spectrum. The present differential flux of neutrinos is given by [36, 37]

\[\frac{d\Phi_{\nu}}{dE_{0}}=\frac{1}{4\pi}\int dz\frac{1}{H_{0}h(z )}\frac{Y_{X}s_{0}}{\tau_{X}}\exp(-t/\tau_{X})\frac{dN_{\nu}}{dE_{0}},\] (28)

where \(s_{0}\) is the present entropy density and \(h(z)=[(1+z)^{3}\Omega_{m}+\Omega_{\Lambda}]^{1/2}\) with \(\Omega_{m}\) and \(\Omega_{\Lambda}\) being the density parameters of non-relativistic matter and dark energy, respectively. Here neutrinos produced with energy \(E\) are redshifted to the observed energy \(E_{0}=E/(1+z)\) and \(E\) is just half of the mass of \(X\). The source spectrum \(dN_{\nu}/dE_{0}\) is given by

\[\frac{dN_{\nu}(E_{0})}{dE_{0}}=f_{i}\delta(E-E_{0}(1+z)),\] (29)

where \(f_{i}\) is the fraction of the neutrino spacies \(i=e,\mu,\tau\) emitted by the decay of \(X\). (Notice that \(\sum_{i}f_{i}=1\).) We have assumed that only electron neutrinos are produced in the decay process. However, we should take the effects of neutrino oscillations into account. Neutrino oscillations can be described by six parameters: two independent mass differences \((\Delta m^{2}_{12},\Delta m^{2}_{23})\), three mixing angles \((\theta_{12},\theta_{23},\theta_{13})\) and a CP-violating phase \(\delta\). A mixing angle \(\theta_{23}\) is \(\sim 45^{\circ}\) from atmospheric neutrino experiments [38]. A mixing angle \(\theta_{12}\) is determined by solar neutrino experiments as \(\theta_{12}\simeq 34^{\circ}\) [39]. CHOOZ experiment presented a mixing angle \(\theta_{13}<12^{\circ}\) [40]. In our case, neutrino traveling distance is very long and mass differences are irrelevant. CP-violating phase \(\delta\) enters the mixing matrix only in combination with \(\sin\theta_{13}\). In a reasonable approximation, \(f_{e}\sim 0.6\) and \(f_{\mu}\sim f_{\tau}\sim 0.2\).

The present atmospheric neutrino \(\nu_{\mu}+\bar{\nu}_{\mu}\) data gives the upper bound of the differential flux of \(\nu_{\mu}(\bar{\nu}_{\mu})\) neutrinos. The atmospheric neutrino has been observed by Super-Kamiokande [38] and AMANDA [41]. For observational flux of energy range \(0.3-1.0\times 10^{3}~{}{\rm GeV}\) we adopt the result in [42] where the atmospheric neutrino fluxes are estimated from the data on atmospheric neutrino event rates measured by the Super-Kamiokande experiment. For higher ernergy range \(1.3\times 10^{3}-3.0\times 10^{5}~{}{\rm GeV}\) we use the atmospheric neutrino spectrum derived from AMANDA. In Fig. 16, we show the atmospheric neutrino fluxes from the Super-Kamiokande and AMANDA experiments as well as the diffuse neutrino fluxes from the \(X\) decay.

Futhermore, the diffuse neutrino flux is also constrained from null detection of the relic supernova \(\bar{\nu}_{e}\) flux by Super-Kamiokande. In [43], the upperbound on \(\bar{\nu}_{e}\) flux is obtained as \(\Phi_{\bar{\nu}_{e}}\leq 1.2\mathrm{cm}^{-2}\mathrm{s}^{-1}\) above threshold of \(E_{\nu}>19.3\mathrm{MeV}\).

We require that the neutrino flux from \(X\) decay should not exceed the observed atmospheric \(\nu_{\mu}+\bar{\nu}_{\mu}\) flux and upperlimit of the relic supernona \(\bar{\nu}_{e}\) flux, which leads to the constraints on the abundance of \(X\) as shown in Fig. 17. In the figure we also show the constraint from relic supernova search only. When lifetime is short, the constraint is very weak since the neutrinos get redshifted until the present and their energy becomes lower than the \(20\) MeV. For intermediate lifetime, the constraints on the abundances of \(X\) are determined by the relic supernova \(\bar{\nu}_{e}\) search and they are in proportion to \(m_{X}\) because the diffuse \(\bar{\nu}_{e}\) flux is determined by the number of injected neutrinos above threshold energy, hence \(Y_{X}\). When lifetime is long, however, the constraints are determined by atmospheric neutrino fluxes. Since the neutrino flux has a peak at \(\sim m_{X}/(1+z_{d})\) (\(z_{d}\): redshift at \(t=\tau_{X}\)), the maximum differential neutrino flux is propotional to \(Y_{X}/m_{X}\). On the other hand, the observed differential neutrino flux is roughly propotional to \(E^{-3}\) and hence \(m_{X}^{-3}\) at \(E\sim m_{X}\). Therefore, the constraint on \(m_{X}Y_{X}\) depends on \(m_{X}\) as \(m_{X}m_{X}^{-3}/m_{X}^{-1}\sim m_{X}^{-1}\). This means the constraints become severe with larger mass as shown in Fig. 17. Constraints for lifetimes longer than present time \(t_{0}\) scale by a factor \(t_{0}/\tau_{X}\) relative to the constraints at \(t_{0}=\tau_{X}\).

[FIGURE:S4.F16][ENDFIGURE]

[FIGURE:S4.F17][ENDFIGURE]

### Diffuse Photon Flux

High energy photons and electrons (positrons) produced in the three and four-body decay may be observed as diffuse gamma rays when the decay takes place after the recombination epoch. In calculating the diffuse photon spectrum, we must consider primary photon spectrum which is not monoenergetic. In addition, we should also take account of the absorption of gamma rays along the line of sight.

Since photons are produced through three- and four-body decays, their spectrum is not monochromatic unlike neutrino. The energy distributions of photons, neutrinos, leptons and nucleons produced by the three- and four-body decay of \(X\) are shown in Figs. 1-4. The energy of produced electrons and positrons is transferred to the background photons through inverse Compton process. In calculating the photon flux, we have taken into account the photons produced by the inverse Compton process as well as those from the cascade decay chain induced by the three- and four-body decay of \(X\). The latter effect becomes more important for high energy photons. However, since the inverse Compton process produces many soft photons, the formar process becomes more significant for low energy photons. The details of calculation of inverse Compton process are given in B. Nucleons are also produce in the decay and they produce photons through inverse Compton process or \(\beta\) decay. However, we neglect this effect since the number density of produced nucleons is sufficiently small. In Fig. 18, we plot photon flux for \(m_{X}=10^{4}{\rm GeV}\).

[FIGURE:S4.F18][ENDFIGURE]

High energy photons injected in the universe, in general, scatter through various processes; photon pair production, photon-photon scattering and pair production in matter. At the eraly epochs absorption and scattering due to the background photons are important, whereas significant absorption by diffuse IR-UV photons emitted from galaxies takes place at later epochs.

First let us consider the radiative processes due to the background photons. In the present case, the relevant processes are photon-photon scattering and photon pair creation [44]. Then, photons degrade their energy by producing electron-positron pairs or dividing their energy with the background photons. The photon spectrum was calculated in detail in [45]. According to [45] the present differential flux of photons is given by

\[\frac{d\Phi_{\gamma}}{dE_{0}} = \frac{1}{4\pi}\int^{z_{*}}_{0}dz\frac{1}{H_{0}h(z)}\frac{Y_{X}s_{ 0}}{\tau_{X}}\exp(-t/\tau_{X})\] (30)
\[\times\int dE\mathcal{L}_{s}(E_{0}(1+z),E,z)\mathcal{L}_{i}(E,z)B _{X},\]

where \(\mathcal{L}_{i}(E,z)\) is the number of photons per unit energy produced both directly and by inverse Compton at \(z\) for one \(X\) decay, and \(z_{*}(\simeq 700)\) is the redshift at which the optical depth of high enrergy photons becomes \(1\). In addition, \(\mathcal{L}_{s}(E_{1},E_{2},z)\) is the number of photons per unit energy in the spectrum when photons with energy \(E_{1}\) are produced by scattering of photons with energy \(E_{2}\) at redshift \(z\). If there is no scattering, \(\mathcal{L}_{s}(E_{1},E_{2},z)\) becomes \(\delta(E_{1}-E_{2})\). (The concrete expression of \(\mathcal{L}_{s}(E_{1},E_{2},z)\) is found in [45].)

In addition, \(\gamma\) rays with GeV to TeV energies are absorbed via electron-positron pair production on diffuse background IR-UV photons which have been emitted by galaxies [46, 47, 48]. In this paper, we adopt the result of [48] which calculated the optical depth \(\tau_{\rm IR}\) of the universe for \(\gamma\) rays having energies from 4 GeV to 100 TeV at redshifts from 0 to 5. (See Fig. 8 in [48].) Then the resultant photon spectrum is given by Eq. (30) multiplied by \(e^{-\tau_{\rm IR}}\). We neglect the secondary soft photons produced via electron-positron pair production on diffuse background IR-UV photons, and only consider the attenuation of high energy photons.

In Fig. 19, we show the diffuse photon flux from the COMPTEL [49] and EGRET [50] observations and decay of \(X\), from which we obtain the upper limit on the abundance of \(X\) as shown in Fig. 20. Compared with the limit from the neutrino flux, the constraints from photon flux are almost insensitive to \(m_{X}\). This can be understood as follows. The differential photon flux at the peak energy is roughly proportional to \(Y_{X}/m_{X}\) from the same reasoning as the neutrino flux in Sec. 4.1, while the observed one is proportional to \(E^{-2}\propto m_{X}^{-2}\). Thus, the constraint on \(Y_{X}\) depends on \(m_{X}\) as \(m_{X}^{-2}m_{X}\sim m_{X}^{-1}\), which means that the limit on \(m_{X}Y_{X}\) is almost insensitive to \(m_{X}\). Fig. 20 shows that the constraints become less stringent with larger \(m_{X}\) when lifetime is long. There are two reasons for this. One is EGRET had observed up to \(100{\rm GeV}\). When \(m_{X}\) is large, the present photon energy at which the flux becomes maximum may exceed the energy range of EGRET observation. The other is higher energy photons are more effectively absorbed by diffuse background photons.

[FIGURE:S4.F19][ENDFIGURE]

[FIGURE:S4.F20][ENDFIGURE]

## 5 Conclusion

In this paper, we have considered the long-lived massive particle \(X\) which mainly decays into a neutrino and an invisible particle, and have investigated the cosmological and astrophysical constraints on the high-energy neutrino and photon injection due to decay of \(X\)-particle. We have shown that the BBN, CMB, diffuse neutrino fluxes and diffuse gamma rays provide stringent constraints on the abundance of the decaying particle \(X\). We summarize the constraints in Figs. 21 and 22.

[FIGURE:S5.F21][ENDFIGURE]

[FIGURE:S5.F22][ENDFIGURE]

_Acknowledgments_: This work was supported in part by the Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research from the Ministry of Education, Science, Sports, and Culture of Japan, No. 18540254 and No 14102004 (M.K.). This work was also supported in part by JSPS-AF Japan-Finland Bilateral Core Program (M.K.), and PPARC grant, PP/D000394/1, EU grant MRTN-CT-2006-035863, the European Union through the Marie Curie Research and Training Network ”UniverseNet”, MRTN-CT-2006-035863 (K.K.).

## Appendix A Bottzmann equation

In order to investigate effects of photo-dissociation processes and \(p\leftrightarrow n\) conversion processes, we have to calculate a photon spectrum. In this paper, a source of high energy photon is charged leptons and pions which are produced through scattering of high energy neutrinos off background leptons. Therefore, we determine the time evolution of the distribution function of high energy neutrinos in order to investigate the photon spectrum. In this appendix, we write down Boltzmann equations which determines the high energy neutrino spectrum. Our notation is the same as [33].

The high energy neutrinos (\(\nu\)) produced in \(X\) decay scatter off the thermal neutrino (\(\nu_{b}\)) in the background by the following processes;

\[\nu_{i}+\nu_{i,b} \rightarrow \nu_{i}+\nu_{i},\] (31)
\[\nu_{i}+\bar{\nu}_{i,b} \rightarrow \nu_{i}+\bar{\nu}_{i},\] (32)
\[\nu_{i}+\bar{\nu}_{i,b} \rightarrow \nu_{j}+\bar{\nu}_{j},\] (33)
\[\nu_{i}+\nu_{j,b} \rightarrow \nu_{i}+\nu_{j},\] (34)
\[\nu_{i}+\bar{\nu}_{j,b} \rightarrow \nu_{i}+\bar{\nu}_{j},\] (35)
\[\nu_{i}+\bar{\nu}_{i,b} \rightarrow e^{-}+e^{+},\] (36)
\[\nu_{i}+\bar{\nu}_{i,b} \rightarrow \mu^{-}+\mu^{+}.\] (37)

where index \(i\) and \(j\) represent \(e\), \(\mu\) and \(\tau\) with \(i\neq j\). All the amplitude squared \(|{\cal M}|^{2}\) in these reactions take the following form:

\[|{\cal M}|^{2}=32G_{F}^{2}[a(pp^{\prime})^{2}+b(pq)^{2}+c(pq^{ \prime})^{2}+dm^{2}(pp^{\prime})],\] (38)

where \(G_{F}\simeq 1.17\times 10^{-5}{\rm GeV}^{-2}\) is the Fermi constant, the coefficients \(a\) – \(d\) depend on the individual reaction, \(p\) and \(p^{\prime}\) are the initial momenta of high energy neutrino and background neutrino, \(q\) and \(q^{\prime}\) are the final momenta, and \(m\) represents the mass of the fermion the in final state. Coefficients for each processes are given in Table 1.

[TABLE:A1.T1][ENDTABLE]

First, let us consider the neutrino scattering processes Eqs. (31)-(35). Here, we define \(E_{\nu}\) as the energy of initial high energy neutrino and \(E^{\prime}_{\nu}\) as the energy of neutrino in final state. We also write the distribution function of the background neutrino as

\[\bar{f}_{\nu}(\bar{E}_{\nu})=\frac{\bar{E}^{2}_{\nu}}{2\pi^{2}} \frac{1}{\exp(\bar{E}_{\nu}/T_{\nu})+1},\] (39)

where \(\bar{E}_{\nu}\) is the energy of background neutrino and \(T_{\nu}\) is the neutrino temperature. We describe the contribution to the time derivative of the neutrino distribution function. When \(E_{\nu},E^{\prime}_{\nu}\gg\bar{E}_{\nu}\), the increases of distribution function due to scattering is written as

\[= \frac{4}{3\pi}G^{2}_{F}\int^{\infty}_{E^{\prime}_{\nu}}dE_{\nu} \frac{1}{E^{2}_{\nu}}[aE^{2}_{\nu}+b(E_{\nu}-E^{\prime}_{\nu})^{2}+c{E^{\prime }}^{2}_{\nu}]f_{\nu}(E_{\nu})\] (40)
\[\times \int^{\infty}_{0}d\bar{E}_{\nu}\bar{E}_{\nu}\bar{f}_{\nu}(\bar{E} _{\nu})\]

On the other hand, decreases of neutrino distribution function is written as

\[\left.\frac{\partial f_{\nu}(E_{\nu})}{\partial t}\right|_{-} = -\frac{1}{8}\frac{1}{E^{2}_{\nu}}f_{\nu}(E_{\nu})\int^{\infty}_{0 }d\bar{E}_{\nu}\frac{1}{\bar{E}^{2}_{\nu}}\bar{f}_{\nu}(\bar{E}_{\nu})\int^{4E _{\nu}\bar{E}_{\nu}}_{0}dss\sigma(s)\] (41)
\[= -\frac{4}{3\pi}G^{2}_{F}\left(a+\frac{1}{3}b+\frac{1}{3}c\right) \int^{\infty}_{0}d\bar{E}_{\nu}\bar{E}_{\nu}\bar{f}_{\nu}(\bar{E}_{\nu}),\]

where \(\sigma(s)\) is the total cross section obtained from the amplitude Eq. (38). Notice that the condition for the neutrino number conservation is realized;

\[\int^{\infty}_{0}dE_{\nu}\left.\frac{\partial f_{\nu}(E_{\nu})}{ \partial t}\right|_{+}=-\int^{\infty}_{0}dE_{\nu}\left.\frac{\partial f_{\nu}( E_{\nu})}{\partial t}\right|_{-}\] (42)

unless the effects of inelastic channels \((\nu+\bar{\nu}\to e^{+}+e^{-},\mu^{+}+\mu^{-})\) are taken into account.

Effects of thecharged lepton pair creation process can be taken into account in the same way, and the contribution to the time derivative of the neutrino distribution function is given by

\[\left.\frac{\partial f_{\nu}(E_{\nu})}{\partial t}\right|_{-} = -\frac{1}{8}\frac{1}{E^{2}_{\nu}}f_{\nu}(E_{\nu})\int^{\infty}_{0 }d\bar{E}_{\nu}\frac{1}{\bar{E}^{2}_{\nu}}\bar{f}_{\nu}(\bar{E}_{\nu})\int^{4E _{\nu}\bar{E}_{\nu}}_{4m^{2}}dss\sigma(s)\] (43)
\[= -\frac{1}{16\pi}G^{2}_{F}\frac{1}{E^{2}_{\nu}}f_{\nu}(E_{\nu}) \int^{\infty}_{0}d\bar{E}_{\nu}\frac{1}{\bar{E}^{2}_{\nu}}\bar{f}_{\nu}(\bar{E }_{\nu})\]
\[\times \left[\left(a+\frac{1}{3}b+\frac{1}{3}c\right)I_{2}+\left(2d- \frac{1}{3}b-\frac{1}{3}c\right)m^{2}I_{1}\right]\]

with

\[I_{2} = \frac{4}{3}\left(4-\frac{4m^{2}}{E_{\nu}\bar{E}_{\nu}}\right)^{1/ 2}E_{\nu}\bar{E}_{\nu}(8E^{2}_{\nu}\bar{E}^{2}_{\nu}-2m^{2}E_{\nu}\bar{E}_{\nu }-3m^{4})\] (44)
\[- 4m^{6}\ln\left[\frac{2\{4-(4m^{2}/E_{\nu}\bar{E}_{\nu})\}^{1/2}E _{\nu}\bar{E}_{\nu}+4E_{\nu}\bar{E}_{\nu}-2m^{2}}{2m^{2}}\right],\]
\[I_{1} = 2\left(4-\frac{4m^{2}}{E_{\nu}\bar{E}_{\nu}}\right)^{1/2}E_{\nu} \bar{E}_{\nu}(2E_{\nu}\bar{E}_{\nu}-m^{2})\] (45)
\[- 2m^{4}\ln\left[\frac{2\{4-(4m^{2}/E_{\nu}\bar{E}_{\nu})\}^{1/2}E _{\nu}\bar{E}_{\nu}+4E_{\nu}\bar{E}_{\nu}-2m^{2}}{2m^{2}}\right].\]

Coefficients for the charged lepton production processes are given in Table 1.

In addition, there are processes for neutrino scattering as follows:

\[\nu_{e}+\bar{\nu}_{\mu,b}\to\mu^{+}+e^{-},\] (46)
\[\nu_{\mu}+\bar{\nu}_{e,b}\to\mu^{-}+e^{+}.\] (47)

The amplitudes squared in these reactions take the form given by

\[|{\cal M}|^{2}_{\nu_{e}+\bar{\nu}_{\mu,b}\to\mu^{+}+e^{-}} = 128G_{F}^{2}(pq^{\prime})\left[(pq^{\prime})-\frac{1}{2}(m^{2}_{ \mu}-m^{2}_{e})\right],\] (48)
\[|{\cal M}|^{2}_{\nu_{\mu}+\bar{\nu}_{e,b}\to\mu^{-}+e^{+}} = 128G_{F}^{2}(pq^{\prime})\left[(pq^{\prime})+\frac{1}{2}(m^{2}_{ \mu}-m^{2}_{e})\right].\] (49)

Effects of these process can be taken into account in the same way. However, it is somewhat complicated to calculate Boltzmann equations for these processes due to the mass difference between muon and electron. The contributions to the time derivative of the neutrino distribution function are given by

\[\left.\frac{f_{\nu_{e}}(E_{\nu})}{\partial t}\right|_{\nu_{e}+ \bar{\nu}_{\mu,b}\to\mu^{+}+e^{-}} = \left.\frac{f_{\nu_{\mu}}(E_{\nu})}{\partial t}\right|_{\nu_{\mu} +\bar{\nu}_{e,b}\to\mu^{-}+e^{+}},\] (50)
\[= -\frac{G_{F}^{2}}{24\pi}E_{\nu}f_{\nu}(E_{\nu})\int^{\infty}_{0}d \bar{E}_{\nu}\bar{f}_{\nu}(\bar{E}_{\nu})I_{3}.\]

with

\[I_{3} = \frac{z}{3}\left[-5x^{2}-2xy-5y^{2}-20(x+y)+64\right]\] (51)
\[+ \left(x^{3}-3x^{2}y-3xy^{2}+y^{3}\right)\ln\left[\frac{4-x-y+2z}{ 2\sqrt{xy}}\right]\]
\[+ |x-y|^{3}\ln\left[\frac{4(x+y)-(x-y)^{2}-2z|x-y|}{8\sqrt{xy}} \right].\]

where \(x=m^{2}_{\mu}/E_{\nu}\bar{E}_{\nu}\), \(y=m^{2}_{e}/E_{\nu}\bar{E}_{\nu}\) and \(z=\left[4-2(x+y)+\frac{1}{4}(x-y)^{2}\right]^{\frac{1}{2}}\).

Finally, we consider the effect of charged pion pair creation process. The cross section for charged pion pair production is given by

\[\sigma(\nu\bar{\nu}\to\pi^{+}\pi^{-})=\frac{1}{12\pi}G_{F}^{2}(1- 2\sin^{2}\theta_{W})^{2}s\left(1-\frac{4m^{2}_{\pi}}{s}\right)^{\frac{3}{2}}|F (s)|^{2}.\] (52)

with

\[|F(s)|^{2}=\frac{m^{4}_{\rho}}{(s-m^{2}_{\rho})^{2}+m^{2}_{\rho} \Gamma^{2}_{\rho}}.\] (53)

where \(m_{\rho}\) and \(\Gamma_{\rho}\) is the mass and decay width of the \(\rho\) meson, respectively [51]. The contribution to the time derivative of the neutrino distribution function is given by Eq. (43) and the cross section above.

Next, we turn now to neutrino-electron scattering processes. The high energy neutrinos also scatter off the thermal electron \((e^{-}_{b})\) and positron \((e^{+}_{b})\) by the following processes;

\[\nu_{e}+e^{-}_{b} \rightarrow \nu_{e}+e^{-},\] (54)
\[\nu_{e}+e^{+}_{b} \rightarrow \nu_{e}+e^{+},\] (55)
\[\nu_{i}+e^{-}_{b} \rightarrow \nu_{i}+e^{-},\] (56)
\[\nu_{i}+e^{+}_{b} \rightarrow \nu_{i}+e^{+}.\] (57)

where index \(i\) represents \(\mu\) and \(\tau\). All the amplitude squared in these reactions take the same form as Eq. (38). In this case, however, \(p\) and \(q\) are the initial and final momenta of neutrino and \(p^{\prime}\) and \(q^{\prime}\) are that of background electron (positron). Coefficients for each processes are given in Table 2.

[TABLE:A1.T2][ENDTABLE]

We write the distribution function of the background electron (positron) as

\[\bar{f}_{e}(\bar{E}_{e})=\frac{\bar{p}^{2}_{e}}{2\pi^{2}}\frac{1} {\exp(\bar{E}_{e}/T_{\gamma})+1}.\] (58)

where \(\bar{E}_{e}\) and \(\bar{p}_{e}\) is the energy and momentum of background electron (positron), respectively. Photon temperature \(T_{\gamma}\) is different from neutrino temperature \(T_{\nu}\) due to neutrino decoupling and subsequent electron-positron pair annihilation. From entropy conservation, the relation between them is given by

(59)

The effects of neutrino-electron scattering are only important at early time because of the Boltzmann suppression of the distribution function of background electron (positron). When \(E_{\nu},E^{\prime}_{\nu}\gg\bar{E}_{e}\), the increase and decrease of distribution functions are given by

\[= \frac{4}{3\pi}G^{2}_{F}\int^{\infty}_{E^{\prime}_{\nu}}dE_{\nu} \frac{1}{E^{2}_{\nu}}[aE^{2}_{\nu}+b(E_{\nu}-E^{\prime}_{\nu})^{2}+c{E^{\prime }}^{2}_{\nu}]f_{\nu}(E_{\nu})\] (60)
\[\times \int^{\infty}_{0}d\bar{p}_{e}\bar{E}_{e}\bar{f}_{e}(\bar{E}_{e}) \left(1-\frac{m^{2}_{e}}{4\bar{E}^{2}_{e}}\right),\]
\[\left.\frac{\partial f_{\nu}(E_{\nu})}{\partial t}\right|_{-} = -\frac{1}{8}\frac{1}{E^{2}_{\nu}}f_{\nu}(E_{\nu})\int^{\infty}_{0 }d\bar{p}_{e}\frac{1}{\bar{p}_{e}\bar{E}_{e}}\bar{f}_{e}(\bar{E}_{e})\int ds(s -m^{2}_{e})\sigma(s)\] (61)
\[= -\frac{4}{3\pi}G^{2}_{F}\left(a+\frac{1}{3}b+\frac{1}{3}c\right)E _{\nu}f_{\nu}(E_{\nu})\]
\[\times \int^{\infty}_{0}d\bar{p}_{e}\bar{E}_{e}\bar{f}_{e}(\bar{E}_{e}) \left(1-\frac{m^{2}_{e}}{4\bar{E}^{2}_{e}}\right).\]

Notice that the condition for the neutrino number conservation is also realized just as neutrino-neutrino scattering.

We also include the following process:

\[\nu_{\mu}+e^{-}\to\nu_{e}+\mu^{-}.\] (62)

The amplitude squared in this reaction is give by

\[|{\cal M}|^{2}_{\nu_{\mu}+e^{-}\to\nu_{e}+\mu^{-}} = 128G_{F}^{2}(pp^{\prime})\left[(pp^{\prime})-\frac{1}{2}(m^{2}_{ \mu}-m^{2}_{e})\right].\] (63)

For simplicity, we neglect the mass difference between muon and electron in this reaction. On this assumption, this process is the same form as \(\nu_{i}+e\to\nu_{i}+e\).

In addition, we consider the effect of pion pair creation process. The cross section for pion pair production is given by

\[\sigma(\bar{\nu}_{e}e^{-}\to\pi^{-}\pi^{0})=\frac{1}{12\pi}G_{F}^ {2}s\left(1-\frac{4m^{2}_{\pi}}{s}\right)^{\frac{3}{2}}|F(s)|^{2},\] (64)

where \(|F(s)|^{2}\) is defined in Eq. (53) [51]. The contribution to the time derivative of the neutrino distribution function is given by Eq. (61) with the cross section above.

Then one can obtain the Boltzmann equations describing the evolution of the spectra for the high energy neutrinos;

\[\frac{\partial f_{\nu_{i}}(E^{\prime}_{\nu})}{\partial t} = \frac{4G_{F}^{2}}{3\pi}\int^{\infty}_{E^{\prime}_{\nu}}dE_{\nu} \frac{1}{E^{2}_{\nu}}\sum_{j}\left[a^{\nu}_{in,ij}E^{2}_{\nu}+b^{\nu}_{in,ij}( E_{\nu}-E^{\prime}_{\nu})^{2}+c^{\nu}_{in,ij}{E^{\prime}}^{2}_{\nu}\right]f_{ \nu_{j}}(E_{\nu})\] (65)
\[\times \int^{\infty}_{0}d\bar{E}_{\nu}\bar{E}_{\nu}\bar{f}_{\nu}(\bar{E} _{\nu})\]
\[- \frac{4G_{F}^{2}}{3\pi}E^{\prime}_{\nu}f_{\nu_{i}}(E^{\prime}_{ \nu})\left(a^{\nu}_{out}+\frac{1}{3}b^{\nu}_{out}+\frac{1}{3}c^{\nu}_{out} \right)\int^{\infty}_{0}d\bar{E}_{\nu}\bar{E}_{\nu}\bar{f}_{\nu}(\bar{E}_{\nu})\]
\[+ \frac{4G_{F}^{2}}{3\pi}\int^{\infty}_{E^{\prime}_{\nu}}dE_{\nu} \frac{1}{E^{2}_{\nu}}\left[a^{e}_{in,i}E^{2}_{\nu}+b^{e}_{in,i}(E_{\nu}-E^{ \prime}_{\nu})^{2}+c^{e}_{in,i}{E^{\prime}}^{2}_{\nu}\right]f_{\nu_{i}}(E_{\nu})\]
\[\times \int^{\infty}_{0}d\bar{p}_{e}\bar{E}_{e}\bar{f}_{e}(\bar{E}_{e}) \left(1-\frac{1}{4}\frac{m^{2}_{e}}{\bar{E}^{2}_{e}}\right)\]
\[- \frac{4G_{F}^{2}}{3\pi}E^{\prime}_{\nu}f_{\nu_{i}}(E^{\prime}_{ \nu})\left(a^{e}_{out,i}+\frac{1}{3}b^{e}_{out,i}+\frac{1}{3}c^{e}_{out,i} \right)\int^{\infty}_{0}d\bar{p}_{e}\bar{E}_{e}\bar{f}_{e}(\bar{E}_{e})\left(1 -\frac{1}{4}\frac{m^{2}_{e}}{\bar{E}^{2}_{e}}\right)\]
\[+ \left(\frac{\partial f_{\nu_{i}}(E^{\prime}_{\nu})}{\partial t} \right)_{\nu_{i}+\bar{\nu}_{i}\to e^{-}+e^{+}}+\left(\frac{\partial f_{\nu_{i} }(E^{\prime}_{\nu})}{\partial t}\right)_{\nu_{i}+\bar{\nu}_{i}\to\mu^{-}+\mu^{ +}}\]
\[+ \left(\frac{\partial f_{\nu_{e}}(E^{\prime}_{\nu})}{\partial t} \right)_{\nu_{e}+\bar{\nu}_{\mu}\to e^{-}+\mu^{+}}\delta_{i,e}+\left(\frac{ \partial f_{\nu_{\mu}}(E^{\prime}_{\nu})}{\partial t}\right)_{\nu_{\mu}+\bar{ \nu}_{e}\to\mu^{-}+e^{+}}\delta_{i,\mu}\]
\[+ \left(\frac{\partial f_{\nu_{e}}(E^{\prime}_{\nu})}{\partial t} \right)_{\nu_{\mu}+e^{-}\to\nu_{e}+\mu^{-}}\delta_{i,e}+\left(\frac{\partial f _{\nu_{\mu}}(E^{\prime}_{\nu})}{\partial t}\right)_{\nu_{\mu}+e^{-}\to\nu_{e}+ \mu^{-}}\delta_{i,\mu}\]
\[+ \left(\frac{\partial f_{\nu_{i}}(E^{\prime}_{\nu})}{\partial t} \right)_{\nu_{i}+\bar{\nu}_{i}\to\pi^{+}+\pi^{-}}+\left(\frac{\partial f_{\nu_ {e}}(E^{\prime}_{\nu})}{\partial t}\right)_{\nu_{e}+e^{+}\to\pi^{+}+\pi^{0}} \delta_{i,e}\]
\[+ \frac{1}{2\tau_{X}}n_{X}\delta(E^{\prime}_{\nu}-m_{X}/2)\delta_{i ,e}\]
\[+ E^{\prime}_{\nu}H\frac{\partial f_{\nu_{i}}(E^{\prime}_{\nu})}{ \partial E^{\prime}_{\nu}}-2Hf_{\nu_{i}}(E^{\prime}_{\nu}),\]

where \(H\) is the expansion rate of the universe and \(\delta_{i,j}\) is a Kronecker delta. The coefficients for neutrino-neutrino scattering are given by

\[a^{\nu}_{out}=4,~{}~{}~{}~{}b^{\nu}_{out}=0,~{}~{}~{}~{}c^{\nu}_ {out}=13,\] (66)
\[a^{\nu}_{in,ii}=6,~{}~{}~{}b^{\nu}_{in,ii}=9,~{}~{}~{}c^{\nu}_{ in,ii}=11,\] (67)
\[a^{\nu}_{in,ij}=1,~{}~{}~{}b^{\nu}_{in,ij}=1,~{}~{}~{}c^{\nu}_{ in,ij}=2,~{}~{}~{}(i\neq j).\] (68)

For example, let us derive \(a^{\nu}_{out}\). Factor 2 comes from \(\nu_{i}\nu_{i}\to\nu_{i}\nu_{i}\) scattering and another factor 2 comes from \(\nu_{i}\nu_{j}\to\nu_{i}\nu_{j}\) scattering. Consequently, the coefficient \(a^{\nu}_{out}\) amount to 4. Other coefficients can be derived in the same manner. The coefficients for neutrino-electron scattering are given by

\[a^{e}_{out,e}=(C_{V}+C_{A}+2)^{2}+(C_{V}-C_{A})^{2},b^{e}_{out,e }=0,~{}~{}c^{e}_{out,e}=a^{e}_{out,e},\] (69)
\[a^{e}_{out,j}=(C_{V}+C_{A})^{2}+(C_{V}-C_{A})^{2},~{}~{}~{}~{}~{ }b^{e}_{out,j}=0,~{}~{}c^{e}_{out,j}=a^{e}_{out,j},\] (70)
\[a^{e}_{in,i}=a^{e}_{out,i},~{}~{}~{}b^{e}_{in,i}=b^{e}_{out,i},~ {}~{}~{}c^{e}_{in,i}=c^{e}_{out,i},\] (71)

where index \(i\) represents \(e\), \(\mu\) and \(\tau\) and \(j\) represents \(\mu\) and \(\tau\).

## Appendix B Inverse Compton

In this appendix, we write down Boltzmann equations for inverse Compton process which determine the high energy photon spectrum. The electron energies before scattering and after scattering are given by \(E_{e}\) and \(E^{\prime}_{e}\). \(E_{\gamma}\) is used for the energy of scattered photon and \(\epsilon_{\gamma}\) for background photon.

The diffuse extragalactic \(\gamma\) ray flux has been observed by the COMPTEL and EGRET measurements. COMPTEL and EGRET observed \(\gamma\) ray energy ranges from \(0.8{\rm MeV}\) to \(100{\rm GeV}\). Electrons and positrons which scatter up background photons to this energy range should be highly relativistic. Thus, the number of collisions per unit time per photon energy through inverse Compton process is written as [52],

\[\frac{d^{2}N}{dtdE_{\gamma}}(\epsilon_{\gamma},E_{\gamma},E_{e}) = 8\pi r_{e}^{2}\frac{1}{\Gamma E_{e}}\] (72)
\[\times \left(2q\ln q+(1+2q)(1-q)+\frac{1}{2}\frac{(\Gamma q)^{2}}{1+ \Gamma q}(1-q)\right),\]

where \(r_{e}\) is classical electron radius, \(\Gamma=4\epsilon_{\gamma}E_{e}/m_{e}^{2}\) and \(q=E_{\gamma}/\Gamma(E_{e}-E_{\gamma})\). The maximum photon energy is given by \(E_{e}\Gamma/(1+\Gamma)\).

The Boltzmann equations for inverse Compton process is given by

\[\frac{\partial f_{\gamma}(E_{\gamma})}{\partial t} = \int^{\infty}_{\frac{E_{\gamma}}{2}\left(1+\sqrt{1+4/\Gamma} \right)}dE_{e}f_{e}(E_{e})\int^{\infty}_{0}d\epsilon_{\gamma}f_{b}(\epsilon_{ \gamma})\frac{d^{2}N}{dtdE_{\gamma}}(\epsilon_{\gamma},E_{\gamma},E_{e})\] (73)
\[\frac{\partial f_{e}(E^{\prime}_{e})}{\partial t} = \int^{E_{max}}_{E^{\prime}_{e}}dE_{e}f_{e}(E_{e})\int^{\infty}_{0 }d\epsilon_{\gamma}f_{b}(\epsilon_{\gamma})\frac{d^{2}N}{dtdE_{\gamma}}( \epsilon_{\gamma},E_{\gamma}=E_{e}+\epsilon_{\gamma}-E^{\prime}_{e},E_{e})\] (74)
\[- f_{e}(E^{\prime}_{e})\int^{\infty}_{0}d\epsilon_{\gamma}f_{b}( \epsilon_{\gamma})\frac{dN}{dt}(\epsilon_{\gamma},E^{\prime}_{e})\]

where \(E_{max}={m_{e}}^{2}(E^{\prime}_{e}-\epsilon_{\gamma})/(4{\epsilon_{\gamma}}^{2 }+{m_{e}}^{2}-4\epsilon_{\gamma}E^{\prime}_{e})\) when the denominator is positive and \(E_{max}=\infty\) when negative. The distribution function of the background photons at temperature \(T_{\gamma}\) is represented by \(f_{b}(\epsilon_{\gamma})\),

\[f_{b}(\epsilon_{\gamma})=\frac{{\epsilon_{\gamma}}^{2}}{\pi^{2}} \frac{1}{\exp(\epsilon_{\gamma}/T_{\gamma})-1}.\] (75)

To check the validity of these Boltzmann equations, we show the electron number conservation.

\[\int^{\infty}_{m_{e}}dE^{\prime}_{e}\frac{\partial f_{e}(E^{ \prime}_{e})}{\partial t}=\int^{\infty}_{m_{e}}dE_{e}f_{e}(E_{e})\int^{E_{e}}_ {E_{e}/(1+\Gamma)+\epsilon_{\gamma}}dE^{\prime}_{e}\int^{\infty}_{0}d\epsilon_ {\gamma}f_{b}(\epsilon_{\gamma})\frac{d^{2}N}{dtdE_{\gamma}}(\epsilon_{\gamma} ,E_{e}+\epsilon_{\gamma}-E^{\prime}_{e},E_{e})\]
\[-\int^{\infty}_{m_{e}}dE^{\prime}_{e}f_{e}(E^{\prime}_{e})\int^{ \infty}_{0}d\epsilon_{\gamma}f_{b}(\epsilon_{\gamma})\frac{dN}{dt}(\epsilon_{ \gamma},E^{\prime}_{e})\]
\[=\int^{\infty}_{m_{e}}dE_{e}f_{e}(E_{e})\int^{E_{e}\Gamma/(1+ \Gamma)}_{\epsilon_{\gamma}}dE_{\gamma}\int^{\infty}_{0}d\epsilon_{\gamma}f_{b }(\epsilon_{\gamma})\frac{d^{2}N}{dtdE_{\gamma}}(\epsilon_{\gamma},E_{\gamma}, E_{e})\]
\[-\int^{\infty}_{m_{e}}dE^{\prime}_{e}f_{e}(E^{\prime}_{e})\int^{ \infty}_{0}d\epsilon_{\gamma}f_{b}(\epsilon_{\gamma})\frac{dN}{dt}(\epsilon_{ \gamma},E^{\prime}_{e})\]
\[=\int^{\infty}_{m_{e}}dE_{e}f_{e}(E_{e})\int^{\infty}_{0}d \epsilon_{\gamma}f_{b}(\epsilon_{\gamma})\frac{dN}{dt}(\epsilon_{\gamma},E_{e})\]
\[-\int^{\infty}_{m_{e}}dE^{\prime}_{e}f_{e}(E^{\prime}_{e})\int^{ \infty}_{0}d\epsilon_{\gamma}f_{b}(\epsilon_{\gamma})\frac{dN}{dt}(\epsilon_{ \gamma},E^{\prime}_{e})\]
\[=0\]

The energy conservation is also easily shown.

\[\int^{\infty}_{\epsilon_{\gamma}}dE_{\gamma}(E_{\gamma}-\epsilon_ {\gamma})\frac{\partial f_{\gamma}(E_{\gamma})}{\partial t}=\int^{\infty}_{m_{ e}}dE_{e}f_{e}(E_{e})\int^{\infty}_{0}d\epsilon_{\gamma}f_{b}(\epsilon_{\gamma})\]
\[\times\int^{E_{e}\Gamma/(1+\Gamma)}_{\epsilon_{\gamma}}dE_{\gamma }(E_{\gamma}-\epsilon_{\gamma})\frac{d^{2}N}{dtdE_{\gamma}}(\epsilon_{\gamma}, E_{\gamma},E_{e})\]
\[\int^{\infty}_{m_{e}}dE^{\prime}_{e}E^{\prime}_{e}\frac{\partial f _{e}(E^{\prime}_{e})}{\partial t}=\int^{\infty}_{m_{e}}dE_{e}f_{e}(E_{e})\int^ {\infty}_{0}d\epsilon_{\gamma}f_{b}(\epsilon_{\gamma})\]
\[\times\int^{E_{e}\Gamma/(1+\Gamma)}_{\epsilon_{\gamma}}dE_{\gamma }(E_{e}+\epsilon_{\gamma}-E_{\gamma})\frac{d^{2}N}{dtdE_{\gamma}}(\epsilon_{ \gamma},E_{\gamma},E_{e})\]
\[-\int^{\infty}_{m_{e}}dE^{\prime}_{e}E^{\prime}_{e}f_{e}(E^{ \prime}_{e})\int^{\infty}_{0}d\epsilon_{\gamma}f_{b}(\epsilon_{\gamma})\frac{ dN}{dt}(\epsilon_{\gamma},E^{\prime}_{e})\]
\[=-\int^{\infty}_{\epsilon_{\gamma}}dE_{\gamma}(E_{\gamma}- \epsilon_{\gamma})\frac{\partial f_{\gamma}(E_{\gamma})}{\partial t}\]

[FIGURE:A2.F23][ENDFIGURE]

In Fig. 23, we plot the photon spectra which are produced through inverse Compton process when high energy electrons are injected. The photon spectra have quite a different form for different value of \(\Gamma\). In the Thomson limit corresponding to \(\Gamma\ll 1\), the first two terms of the right hand side of Eq. (72) is dominant. In this case, many low-energy photons are produced. In the extreme Klein-Nishina limit corresponding to \(\Gamma\gg 1\), the last term of the right hand side of Eq. (72) is dominant at larger \(q\) and photon spectra have peaks near the high-energy end [53]. Our calculation is different from the steady-state method [53, 54]. However, once electron spectrum is in a steady-state, our result is in good agreement with the result in [53, 54].

## References

* [1] J. C. Mather et al., Astrophys. J. **420**, 439 (1994).
* [2] D. Lindley, Astrophys. J. **294** (1985) 1; M. Y. Khlopov and A. D. Linde, Phys. Lett. B **138**, 265 (1984); J. R. Ellis, J. E. Kim and D. V. Nanopoulos, Phys. Lett. B **145**, 181 (1984). R. Juszkiewicz, J. Silk and A. Stebbins, Phys. Lett. B **158**, 463 (1985); J. R. Ellis, D. V. Nanopoulos and S. Sarkar, Nucl. Phys. B **259** (1985) 175; J. Audouze, D. Lindley and J. Silk, Astrophys. J. **293**, L53 (1985); D. Lindley, Phys. Lett. B **171** (1986) 235; M. Kawasaki and K. Sato, Phys. Lett. B **189**, 23 (1987); R. J. Scherrer and M. S. Turner, Astrophys. J. **331** (1988) 19; J. R. Ellis et al., Nucl. Phys. B **373**, 399 (1992).
* [3] M. Kawasaki and T. Moroi, Prog. Theor. Phys. **93**, 879 (1995); Astrophys. J. **452**, 506 (1995).
* [4] E. Holtmann, M. Kawasaki, K. Kohri and T. Moroi, Phys. Rev. D **60**, 023506 (1999)
* [5] K. Jedamzik, Phys. Rev. Lett. **84**, 3248 (2000); M. Kawasaki, K. Kohri and T. Moroi, Phys. Rev. D **63**, 103502 (2001); R. H. Cyburt, J. R. Ellis, B. D. Fields and K. A. Olive, Phys. Rev. D **67**, 103521 (2003).
* [6] R. Dominguez-Tenreiro, Astrophys. J. **313**, 523 (1987).
* [7] M. H. Reno and D. Seckel, Phys. Rev. D **37**, 3441 (1988).
* [8] S. Dimopoulos et al., Astrophys. J. **330**, 545 (1988); Nucl. Phys. B **311**, 699 (1989).
* [9] K. Kohri, Phys. Rev. D **64**, 043515 (2001).
* [10] M. Kawasaki, K. Kohri and T. Moroi, Phys. Lett. B **625**, 7 (2005); Phys. Rev. D **71**, 083502 (2005)
* [11] K. Kohri, T. Moroi and A. Yotsuyanagi, Phys. Rev. D **73**, 123511 (2006).
* [12] K. Jedamzik, Phys. Rev. D **74**, 103509 (2006)
* [13] P. Gondolo, G. Gelmini and S. Sarkar, Nucl. Phys. B **392**, 111 (1993)
* [14] M. Kawasaki and T. Moroi, Phys. Lett. B **346**, 27 (1995)
* [15] J. L. Feng, S. f. Su and F. Takayama, Phys. Rev. D **70**, 063514 (2004); Phys. Rev. D **70**, 075019 (2004).
* [16] T. Kanzaki, M. Kawasaki, K. Kohri and T. Moroi, Phys. Rev. D **75**, 025011 (2007)
* [17] T. Sjostrand et. al., Comput. Phys. Commun. **135**, 238 (2001).
* [18] L.H. Kawano, preprint FERMILAB-Pub-92/04-A (1992).
* [19] Y. I. Izotov, T. X. Thuan and G. Stasinska, arXiv:astro-ph/0702072.
* [20] M. Peimbert, V. Luridiana and A. Peimbert, arXiv:astro-ph/0701580.
* [21] M. Fukugita and M. Kawasaki, Astrophys. J. **646** (2006) 691.
* [22] J. Geiss and G. Gloeckler, Space Sience Reviews **106** (2003) 3.
* [23] G. Sigl, K. Jedamzik, D. N. Schramm and V. S. Berezinsky, Phys. Rev. D **52**, 6682 (1995).
* [24] J. Silk and A. Stebbins, Astrophys. J. **269**, 1 (1983).
* [25] M. Kawasaki and K. Sato, Phys. Lett. B **169**, 280 (1986).
* [26] W. Hu and J. Silk, Phys. Rev. Lett. **70**, 2661 (1993).
* [27] R. A. Sunyaev and Ya. B. Zeldovich, Astrophys. Space Sci. **7**, 20 (1970).
* [28] L. Danese and G. De Zotti, Astron. Astrophys. **107**, 39 (1982).
* [29] G. Steigman, Int. J. Mod. Phys. E **15**, 1 (2006)
* [30] D. N. Spergel et al., arXiv:astro-ph/0603449.
* [31] D. J. Fixsen, E. S. Cheng, J. M. Gales, J. C. Mather, R. A. Shafer and E. L. Wright, Astrophys. J. **473**, 576 (1996)
* [32] Particle Data Group, K. Hagiwara et. al., Phys. Rev. **D66**, 010001 (2002).
* [33] T. Moroi, arXiv:hep-ph/9503210.
* [34] A. R. Zentner and T. P. Walker, Phys. Rev. **D65**, 063506 (2002).
* [35] K. Ichikawa, M. Kawasaki and F. Takahashi, arXiv:astro-ph/0611784
* [36] L. Bergstrom, J. Edsjo and P. Ullio, Phys. Rev. Lett. **87**, 251301 (2001).
* [37] J. F. Beacom, N. F. Bell and G. D. Mack, arXiv:astro-ph/0608090.
* [38] Y. Ashie et. al., Phys. Rev. **D71**, 112005 (2005).
* [39] B. Aharmim et. al., Phys. Rev. **C72**, 055502 (2005).
* [40] M. Apollonio et. al. Eur. Phys. J. **C27**, 331 (2003).
* [41] H. Geenen for the AMANDA Collabortion, _Atmospheric neutrino and muon spectra measured with the AMANDA-II detector_, Proceedings of the 28th International Cosmic Ray Conferences (ICRC 2003), Tsukuba, Japan, 31 Jul - 7 Aug 2003
* [42] M. C. Gonzalez-Garcia, M. Maltoni and J. Rojo, JHEP, **10**, 075 (2006).
* [43] M. Malek et. al., Phys. Rev. Lett. **90**, 061101 (2003).
* [44] A. A. Zdziarski and R. Svensson, Astrophys. J. **344**, 551 (1989).
* [45] G. D. Kribs and I. Z. Rothstein, Phys. Rev. **D55**, 4435 (1997).
* [46] M. H. Salamon and F. W. Stecker, Astrophys. J. **493**, 547 (1998).
* [47] J. R. Primack, R. J. Somerville, J. S. Bullock and J. E. G. Devriendt, AIP Conf. Proc. **558**, 463 (2001).
* [48] F. W. Stecker, M. A. Malkan and S. T. Scully, Astrophys. J. **648**, 774 (2006). See also F. W. Stecker, M. A. Malkan and S. T. Scully, arXiv:astro-ph/0612048.
* [49] S. C. Kappadath et. al., Astron. Astrophys. Suppl. Ser. **120**, 619 (1996); P. Sreekumar, F. W. Stecker and S. C. Kappadath, AIP Conf. Proc. **510**, 459 (2004).
* [50] P. Sreekumarand et. al., Astrophys. J. **494**, 523 (1998).
* [51] See, for example, R. P. Feynman, ”Photon-Hadron Interactions” W. A. Benjamin, INC (1972, Massachusetts).
* [52] F. C. Jones, Phys. Rev. **167**, 1159 (1968).
* [53] G. R. Blumenthal and R. J. Gould, Rev. Mod. Phys. **42**, 237 (1970).
* [54] G. R. Blumenthal, Phys. Rev. **D3**, 2308 (1971).

